content/posts/planning-recognition.md, before:

---
title: Professional Recognition
date: 2019-06-12T01:00:52.000Z
lastmod: 2019-06-13T01:00:52.000Z
cover: /images/cards/paul-farmer-and-me-951x693.jpg
draft: false
categories:
    - planning
tags:
    - professional
description: Awards and Achievements
---
![Paul Farmer, FAICP and myself](/images/planning/recognition/paul-farmer-and-me-275.jpg#floatright)Look, I'm not going to suggest that awards are just piling up on my desk, but I am fortunate to have worked on projects which have received awards, and also recognized for my volunteer efforts with my professional organization, the American Planning Association - Louisiana Chapter. I thought I'd use this post to keep track of them. I even got a photo with then-APA President Paul Farmer, FAICP at one of our state conferences held in Monroe.


# Professional Recognition
## Awards
- 2021 "Outstanding Service" award for continued service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Webmaster
- 2019 "Commitment to Planning" medallion for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer
- 2017 "Outstanding Service" award for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer
- 2015 "Outstanding Service" award for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer

## Certificates
- 2016 FEMA National Disaster Preparedness Training - __Community Resilience__
- 2016 HUD __Housing Quality Standards__
- 2013 APA-LA "__Leadership Experience__" Training, Certificate of Completion
- 2004 Mike Lin Graphic Workshop
- 1997 Intergraph MGE Foundations, GIS Training

## Award Winning Projects
- __St. Tammany Parish Culture, Recreation and Tourism Strategic Plan__: Excellence for a Plan Award from APA Louisiana Chapter, 2016. My employer provided public engagement support to the prime consultant Design Workshop who did the technical work.
- [__Florida Keys Scenic Highway Interpretive Master Plan__](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1htwHegBjhXWVmvmP9pucRg_2a8QQHnDk/view?usp=sharing) Strategic Planning Award, 2007 presented by the American Planning Association, Florida’s Gold Coast Section to FDOT District 6 (Janet Seitlin, project manager) who sponsored the study for Monroe County.  Mr. Taylor was a key member of the planning consultant firm providing technical assistance and producing the study.)


{{< foldergallery src="images/planning/recognition/gallery/" >}}

Commit message:

recognition blog post
Additions to honors and awards

content/posts/planning-recognition.md, after:

---

title: Professional Recognition
date: 2019-06-12T01:00:52.000Z
lastmod: 2025-14-13T01:00:52.000Z
cover: /images/cards/paul-farmer-and-me-951x693.jpg
draft: false
categories:
    - planning
tags:
    - professional
description: Awards and Achievements

---

![Paul Farmer, FAICP and myself](/images/planning/recognition/paul-farmer-and-me-275.jpg#floatright)I am fortunate to have worked on projects which have received awards, and also recognized for my professional and volunteer efforts with the American Planning Association - Louisiana Chapter. I thought I'd use this post to keep track of them. At one event in Monroe I got a photo with then-APA President Paul Farmer, FAICP and at another in Alexandria I was able to get a picture with Louisiana Lt. Governor Billy Nunguesser.

![Lt. Governor Billy Nunguesser and myself](/images/planning/recognition/gallery/Billy_Nunguesser_Lt_Gov-thumb.jpg)

# Professional Recognition

## Awards

- 2025 "Leading with Integrity" and "Practicing Honest Communications" Champion awards received from my coworkers in recognition of upholding company values
- 2021 "Outstanding Service" award for continued service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Webmaster
- 2019 "Commitment to Planning" medallion for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer
- 2017 "Outstanding Service" award for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer
- 2015 "Outstanding Service" award for service to APA Louisiana as the Chapter Information Officer

## Certificates

![AICP seal](/images/planning/recognition/aicp-certified-badge.png#floatright)

- 2025 FHWA's National Highway Institute - **Introduction to NEPA and Transportation Decision-making**
- 2025 FHWA's National Highway Institute - **Basics of Public Involvement in Transportation Decision Making**
- 2017 FEMA National Disaster Preparedness Training - __Community Resilience__
- 2016 HUD __Housing Quality Standards__
- 2013 APA-LA "__Leadership Experience__" Training, Certificate of Completion
- 2004 Mike Lin Graphic Workshop
- 1997 Intergraph MGE Foundations, GIS Training

## Award Winning Projects

- __Spanish Lake Environmental Education Center__ master plan project by Reich Landscape Architecture, with Lake Flato Architects, received recognition from the American Society of Landscape Architects. My firm facilitated stakeholder engagement efforts. Located in the Spanish Lake Basin of east Iberville Parish, near St. Gabriel, Louisiana, SLEEC is the brainchild of the late Scott Nesbit of Natural Resource Professionals, LLC who envisioned that lands held by private interests - such as wetland mitigation banks - could allow for controlled visitation and use by the public through a single entry point featuring an environmental education center. 
- __Just Imagine Southwest Louisiana Resilience Plan__ 2024 Charter Award from the Congress for New Urbanism. Urban Design Associates was prime; my firm served as community engagement lead.
- __St. Tammany Parish Culture, Recreation and Tourism Strategic Plan__: Excellence for a Plan Award from APA Louisiana Chapter, 2016. My employer provided public engagement support to the prime consultant Design Workshop who did the technical work.
- [__Florida Keys Scenic Highway Interpretive Master Plan__](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1htwHegBjhXWVmvmP9pucRg_2a8QQHnDk/view?usp=sharing) Strategic Planning Award, 2007 presented by the American Planning Association, Florida’s Gold Coast Section to FDOT District 6 (Janet Seitlin, project manager) who sponsored the study for Monroe County.  Mr. Taylor was a key member of the planning consultant firm providing technical assistance and producing the study.)

{{< foldergallery src="images/planning/recognition/gallery/" >}}
